Rework docs related to options (#1867)
conan-io/docs: reference/conanfile/attributes.rst

options
-------

Conan provides this attribute to declare traits which will affect only one reference, unlike the settings that are typically the
same for all the recipes in a Conan graph. Options are declared per recipe, this attribute consist on a dictionary where the key is the 
option name and the value is the list of different values that the option can take.

.. important::
   
    All the options with their values are encoded into the package ID, as everything that affects the generated binary.
    See :ref:`method_configure_config_options` and :ref:`method_package_id` methods for information about removing certain
    options for some configurations.

A very common one is the option ``shared`` with allowed values of ``[True, False]`` that many recipes declare and use to configure the

> build system and link static or dynamically the dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
build system to produce a static library or a shared library.
```

Values for each option can be typed or plain strings, and there is a special value, ``ANY``, for
options that can take any value.

.. code-block:: python

    class MyPkg(ConanFile):
        ...
        options = {
            "shared": [True, False],
            "option1": ["value1", "value2"],
            "option2": "ANY",
        }

Every option in a recipe needs to be assigned a value from the ones declared in the ``options`` attribute. The 
consumer can define options using different methods: command line, profile or consumer
recipes; **an uninitialized option will get the value** ``None`` **and it will be a valid value if its contained
in the list of valid values**. Invalid values will produce an error. See attribute :ref:`conanfile_default_options`
for a way to declare a default value for options in a recipe.

.. tip::

    - You can inspect available package options reading the package recipe, which can be
      done with the command :command:`conan inspect mypkg/0.1@user/channel`.

.. tip::

    - Options ``"shared": [True, False]`` and ``"fPIC": [True, False]`` are automatically managed in :ref:`cmake_reference` and
      :ref:`autotools_reference` build helpers.

> **Define the value of an option**

Reviewer: I think this section needs to explain alternatives in order:

- First, the recommended one in the general case, ``default_options``. Specially for values of the current package (there is no example for this at the moment in the docs).
- In the configure() method. Use an example of forcing the value of a requirement option, not a self.option
- In the conanfile.txt
- In the command line

Author: The list is ordered according to precedence as said in the text.

There are examples for `default_options` in the reference entry for that attribute (for options in the same package) and here, for options declared in required packages.

As we mentioned before, values for options in a recipe can be defined using different ways, let's
go over all of them for the example recipe ``mypkg`` defined above:

- In the recipe that declares the option:

  + Using the attribute ``default_options`` in the recipe itself.

  + In the ``configure()`` method of the recipe itself (**this one has the highest precedence**)

    .. code-block:: python

        class MyPkg(ConanFile):

            options = {
                "shared": [True, False],
                "option1": ["value1", "value2"],
                "option2": "ANY",
            }

            def configure(self):

>                 self.options.shared = False

Reviewer: This reads like a confusing use case. Why would you have an option that results always, hardcoded, same value. That is not an option at all?

options
-------

Conan provides this attribute to declare traits which will affect only one reference, unlike the settings that are typically the
same for all the recipes in a Conan graph. Options are declared per recipe, this attribute consist on a dictionary where the key is the 
option name and the value is the list of different values that the option can take.

.. important::
   
    All the options with their values are encoded into the package ID, as everything that affects the generated binary.
    See :ref:`method_configure_config_options` and :ref:`method_package_id` methods for information about removing certain
    options for some configurations.

A very common one is the option ``shared`` with allowed values of ``[True, False]`` that many recipes declare and use to configure the
build system and link static or dynamically the dependencies.

> Values for each option can be typed or plain strings, and there is a special value, ``ANY``, for

Author: ```suggestion
Values for each option can be typed or plain strings (``"value"``, ``True``, ``None``,...) and there is a special value, ``"ANY"``, for
```

options that can take any value.

.. code-block:: python

    class MyPkg(ConanFile):
        ...
        options = {
            "shared": [True, False],
            "option1": ["value1", "value2"],

>             "option2": "ANY",

Reviewer 2: We could enumerate some other interesting option declarations
```suggestion
            "option2": "ANY",
            "option3": [None, "value1", "value2"],
            "option4": [True, False, "value"],
```

  .. code-block:: text

      [settings]
      setting=value

      [options]
      mypkg:shared=False

- Last way of defining values for options is to pass these values using the command argument :command:`-o,--option` in the command line:

  .. code-block:: bash

    $ conan install . -o mypkg:shared=True

> Regarding the precedence of all these ways of assigning a value to an option, it works like any othe configuration element in Conan:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Regarding the precedence of all these ways of assigning a value to an option, it works like any other configuration element in Conan:
```

- Last way of defining values for options is to pass these values using the command argument :command:`-o,--option` in the command line:

  .. code-block:: bash

    $ conan install . -o mypkg:shared=True

Regarding the precedence of all these ways of assigning a value to an option, it works like any other configuration element in Conan:
the closer to the consumer and the command line the higher the precedence. The list above is ordered from the less priority to the
highest one (with the exceptional assignment in ``configure()`` method which cannot be overridden).

**Get the value of an option**

Values from options can be retrieved after they are assigned. For options that belong to the same recipe, the value can
be retrieved in any method to run logic conditional to their values. **Options from required packages can be
retrieved only after the full graph has been resolved**, this means that the value will be available in the methods
``build()``, ``package()``, ``package_info()``. Accessing those values in other methods can lead to unexpected results.

.. code-block:: python

    class OtherPkg(ConanFile):
        requires = "mypkg/0.1@user/channel"

        def build(self):

>             if self.options['mypkg'].shared:

Reviewer: Move to ``validate()`` (in another PR)

- A different behavior has ``self.options.option = None``, because
  ``assert self.options.option != None``.

.. _conanfile_default_options:

default_options
---------------

The attribute ``default_options`` has the purpose of defining the default values for the options
if the consumer (consuming recipe, project, profile or the user through the command line) does
not define them. This attribute should be defined as a python dictionary:

.. code-block:: python

    class MyPkg(ConanFile):
        ...
        options = {"shared": [True, False],
                   "option1": ["value1", "value2"],
                   "option2": "ANY"}
        default_options = {"shared": True,
                           "option1": "value1",
                           "option2": 42}

        def build(self):

>             shared = "-DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=ON" if self.options.shared else "-DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=OFF"

Reviewer: This BUILD_SHARED_LIBS is probably not a good example, as this is already done by ``CMake`` helper. Chose a generic ``cmake.definition`` based on ``option1`` or something like that.

            cmake = CMake(self)
            self.run("cmake . %s %s" % (cmake.command_line, shared))
            ...

Remember that you can also assign default values for options of your requirements as we've seen in
the attribute :ref:`conanfile_options`.

> You can also set the options conditionally to a final value with ``configure()`` instead of using ``default_options``:

Reviewer: It seems that the intent of this has been changed. If you change from config_options => configure you are hardcoding the options values. The existing example with config_options was defining a conditional default value, that could be overriden from downstream.

Author: From this sentence in the docs _"`config_options()` is used to configure or constraint the available options in a package, before they are given a value."_, people understand that assigning a value in `config_options()` is forbidden (https://github.com/conan-io/conan/issues/7786#issuecomment-702945471), that the method is intended only to restrict the possible values of an option or to remove the option.

Reviewer 2: But it also seems that the CCI relies on the current behavior of `config_options` to allow overridable from downstream default_options: https://github.com/conan-io/conan-center-index/pull/3341#issuecomment-717958354
What's the intended behaviour in here?

Author: ATM I think we should describe the current behavior. 

In this section I prefer to use ``configure()`` over ``config_options()`` because it is talking about _"assigning a final value"_ and I understand it means a value that cannot be overridden.
